nixos/postgresql: document psql 15 changes (#267238)
NixOS/nixpkgs: nixos/modules/services/databases/postgresql.md

services.postgresql.dataDir = "/data/postgresql";
```

## Initializing {#module-services-postgres-initializing}

As of NixOS 23.11, `services.postgresql.ensureUsers.*.ensurePermissions` has been deprecated, after a change to default permissions in PostgreSQL 15 invalidated most of its previous use cases:

> - In psql < 15, `ALL PERMISSIONS` used to include `CREATE TABLE`, where in psql >= 15 that would be a separate permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In psql < 15, `ALL PRIVILEGES` used to include `CREATE TABLE`, where in psql >= 15 that would be a separate permission
```

I assume you meant

- psql >= 15 instead gives only the database owner create permissions
- Even on psql < 15 (or databases migrated to >= 15), it is recommended to manually assign permissions along these lines
  - https://www.postgresql.org/docs/release/15.0/
  - https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/ddl-schemas.html#DDL-SCHEMAS-PRIV

### Assigning ownership

> The corresponding system user should be database owner in most cases. This can be done with `services.postgresql.ensureUsers.*.ensureDBOwnership = true;`

Reviewer: Now, here's the hard question, how do we deal with `DynamicUser` (systemd feature) ?

Reviewer: Awesome.

Reviewer: (just mention it then!)

Author: good catch!

### Assigning extra permissions

For many cases, it will be enough to have the database user be the
owner. Until `services.postgresql.ensureUsers.*.ensurePermissions` has
been re-thought, if more users need access to the database, please use
one of the following approaches:

> **WARNING:** please steer clear of `services.postgresql.initialScript`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**WARNING:** `services.postgresql.initialScript` is not recommended for `ensurePermissions` replacement as …
```

#### Assigning permissions in database `postStart`

```nix
    systemd.services.postgresql.postStart = lib.mkAfter ''
      $PSQL service1 -c 'GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO "extraUser1"'
      $PSQL service1 -c 'GRANT SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA public TO "extraUser1"'
      # ....
    '';
```

**Advantage:** compatible with postgres < 15, because it's run
as the database superuser `postgres`.

**Disadvantage:** need to take care of ordering yourself. In this
example, `mkAfter` ensures that permissions are assigned after any
databases from `ensureDatabases` and `extraUser1` from `ensureUsers`
are already created.

#### Assigning permissions in service `preStart` or intermediate oneshot service

```nix
    systemd.services."service1".preStart = ''
      $PSQL -c 'GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO "extraUser1"'
      $PSQL -c 'GRANT SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA public TO "extraUser1"'
      # ....
    '';
```

```nix
    systemd.services."migrate-service1-db1" = {
      type = "oneshot";
      requiredBy = "service1.service";
      before = "service1.service";
      after = "postgresql.service";

>       serviceConfig.User = "service1";

Reviewer: You could also consider the variant where the User is `postgres` itself I guess?

Author: added

>       $PSQL -c 'GRANT SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA public TO "extraUser1"'

Author: FIXME: `$PSQL` is only available in postgresql `postStart`
